CORS-3440: IngressController subnet selection at installation (#1634)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/installer/aws-lb-subnet-selection.md

To achieve this, this enhancement deprecates the existing install-config field `platform.aws.subnets`
in favor of a more flexible configuration field that handles specifying subnets for both
IngressControllers and the cluster infrastructure. These new subnet roles, referred to as
IngressController-role subnets and cluster-role subnets are further defined in [Defining Subnet Roles](#defining-subnets-roles).

## Definitions and Terminology

### The `default` IngressController

This proposal will refer to the IngressController that gets created automatically during installation and handles
the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController. Note that
"default IngressController subnets" refers to the default subnets used by all IngressControllers, including
the `default` IngressController. This is different from "`default`-IngressController subnets", which specifically
means the subnets for the `default` IngressController.

### User-Created IngressControllers

A user-created IngressController is a custom IngressController that is created after installation (Day 2).
It represents all IngressControllers except for the `default` IngressController.

> ### Defining Subnets Roles

Reviewer: I just heard from @makentenza that there is an RFE that would be positively impacted by the design of those fields: [RFE-4738](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-4738)

The request asks support to deploy LBs (control planes, ingress we'rent mentioned directly) on different subnets than EC2 instances/nodes, similar the initial request of this RFE.

If [those validations][1] goes well, I wonder if would be valid to expand/split the `Cluster` role value, which in currently design version covers API LB+Nodes, to something like this:
- ControlPlaneLB
- ControlPlaneNodes
- ComputeNodes

Or group the `*Nodes`, to something like `ClusterNodes`, so it may cover a use case of this RFE, where target deploy Control Plane LB into different subnets than nodes.

Example:

```yaml
        region: us-east-2
        subnetsConfig:
        - id: subnetID-premium-us-east-1a
          roles:
          - ControlPlaneLB
          - IngressController
        - id: subnetID-private-us-east-1a
          roles:
            - ControlPlaneNodes # or group "ClusterNodes"
            - ComputeNodes
```

LMK WDYT  @rvanderp3 @gcs278 @patrickdillon @makentenza 

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634#discussion_r1881057685

Author: @mtulio Good timing for this RFE while we are still talking through this design. 

I'm glad you reminded me about the ControlPlaneLBs. I spoke with service delivery, and the use case (dedicated LB subnets) also applies to the ControlPlaneLBs (_all_ LBs need to be in their own subnet). I completely overlooked the ControlPlaneLBs. The ControlPlaneLBs aren't affected by [OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432) interestingly enough due to the CAPI [logic](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/32ebcce58dbcc19cf83482443add80361aaf1ed2/pkg/cloud/services/elb/loadbalancer.go#L366) that only uses the cluster subnets. Service delivery confirmed there might be users with dedicated ControlPlaneLBs and dedicated IngressControllerLBs that are both different.

I'll admit, I don't quite understand that RFE's use case for IP space savings (routeable vs. non-routeable), but I think we need to this design anyways, so this proposal may provide what they need.

Implementing `ControlPlaneLB` looks straightforward since we already have a [field](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/63c66352579ef08bd365abd529e1924cde6f0d26/api/v1beta2/awscluster_types.go#L215) for it and I think similar validation from `IngressController` will apply to `ControlPlaneLB`. It's scope creep, but I think it's manageable and simple to add it.

As for splitting `ClusterNodes` into `ControlPlaneNodes` and `ComputeNodes`, I'm not sure if that's straight forward, as I don't totally understand how'd that be done with CAPI's [awsCluster.networkSpec.subnets](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/8f46a4d34d18cb090a4b48c9a9260cd3dffd9162/api/v1beta2/network_types.go#L340). Are there any RFEs or use cases to split compute & control plane nodes? I yield to the installer team for this design decision. I think we could always start with the `ClusterNodes` role and add the ControlPlane/Compute decomposed role in the future. That feels like an additive change that's compatible to me, but something we should consider.

Author: @mtulio I updated the proposal to include `ControlPlaneExternalLB`, `ControlPlaneInternalLB`, and `ClusterNode`. I think it was a good exercise that required me to learn a lot about how the installer and CAPA interact together, and how subnets are used. It also tested the API design, and I found a couple of issues that came from expanding the roles.

So, take a look and let me know what you think. I think I'm starting to arrive at the conclusion that it'd be much better to decompose the roles as best as we can on first pass of this enhancement, as adding new roles later may be tricky. As a result, this enhancement is growing. I also added added semantics of "automatic role selection", which is basically what `platform.aws.subnets` does today (it decides the purpose of the subnets). And I framed the roles as an "override" to that. Hopefully that helps frame the proposal more clearly.

Reviewer 2: Generally I support the idea of allowing API LB placement in specific subnets, but a couple of things come to mind: 

First, I have doubts we should have separate values for `ControlPlaneExternalLB`, `ControlPlaneInternalLB`. Instead, could we have a single value for `ControlPlaneLB` and the installer would assign a subnet with that role to the internet-facing LB if the subnet is public and to the internal LB if the subnet is private?

Second, we allow users to specify availability zones in the control-plane machine pools, so I'm trying to assess concerns of redundancy and conflicts. I believe we can handle any conflicts through validation: if availability zones are specified in the control-plane machine pool, we ensure that a provided subnet for that AZ has the control-plane LB role. So that seems manageable, but brings up the question of redundancy: we already have a way of specifying the control plane AZ and, hence, the subnet, so do we need another? 

It seems like this may provide a better UX, in which case a little redundancy is fine.

Reviewer 2: Ignore the second part of my previous comment: I was making a mistaken assumption about LBs and control plane nodes being on the same subnet.

So we just need some simple validation

Author: > First, I have doubts we should have separate values for ControlPlaneExternalLB, ControlPlaneInternalLB. Instead, could we have a single value for ControlPlaneLB and the installer would assign a subnet with that role to the internet-facing LB if the subnet is public and to the internal LB if the subnet is private?

Right, I went back and forth on this myself actually, and I initially started with `ControlPlaneLB`. We could reduce it to `ControlPlaneLB` which needs to include both public & private subnets for public clusters or just private subnets for private clusters.

We should consider this question: will the external control plane LB and the internal control plane LB always use mutually exclusive sets of subnets? I think the answer is yes: `ControlPlaneExternalLB` will always use public subnets and `ControlPlaneInternalLB` will always use private subnets. So there is a clear and simple distinction for the installer to make. In other words, `ControlPlaneLB` might not be the best choice if there was an edge case where the subnets of the two LBs overlapped, resulting in the installer making the wrong assumption for some customers.

Anyways, I'm good with `ControlPlaneLB`, I'll update if no one has any other concern about it.

> So we just need some simple validation with the control plane machinepool

Yea feel free to check out the [Installer Validation Rules](https://github.com/gcs278/enhancements/blob/ingresscontroller-subnets-aws-installtime/enhancements/installer/aws-lb-subnet-selection.md#installer-validation-rules) section to make sure I captured them appropriately. I think you are referring to [Reject IngressControllers or ControlPlaneLB AZs that do not match ClusterNode AZs](https://github.com/gcs278/enhancements/blob/ingresscontroller-subnets-aws-installtime/enhancements/installer/aws-lb-subnet-selection.md#reject-ingresscontrollers-or-controlplanelb-azs-that-do-not-match-clusternode-azs)

Reviewer 2: I am on board with separating into the two separate external vs internal values, but I think the real value to doing that is in the potential future use case of installer-provisioned subnets.

for byo subnets, private vs public is an inherent attribute of the subnet (public subnets have an internet gateway and private have a natgw), so separating into two different values does not encode any additional information and we dont make assumptions with a single value. 

My concern is (was) that with 2 values we are just requiring the user to do a little bit more bookkeeping (which is unnecessary), but i understand that could also be considered a feature not a bug. 

My impression is that the split (internal external) role handles the installer provisioned subnet use case well, but I wanted to bring it up explicitly to see if it sparks anything else.

type AWSSubnetName string
```

#### Ingress Operator Updates

The Ingress Operator will be updated to consume the Ingress Config's `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.classicLoadBalancer.subnets`
or `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer.subnets` fields when creating IngressControllers. The
Ingress Config `subnet` field for the corresponding load balancer type will propagate to the IngressController's relevant
`subnets` field as long as `Subnets` haven't been defined on the IngressController (i.e. defaulting).

This logic will NOT follow the existing defaulting pattern where the default gets encoded in the IngressController
status, because the `Subnets` fields on the IngressController status represent the *actual* state. Instead of encoding
the default in the IngressController object, it will be dynamically sourced from the Ingress Config on each reconcile.
This makes the default `Subnets` behavior dynamic: if the subnets in the Ingress Config are updated, the
IngressController using these defaults will also update, triggering a `Progressing` condition to notify users of the

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 3: > The issue: when defaulting Spec.EndpointPublishingStrategy.LoadBalancer.ProviderParameters.AWS.[Network|Classic]LoadBalancerParameters.Subnets, we are forced to also configure the required values "along the way". For example, Spec.EndpointPublishingStrategy.LoadBalancer.ProviderParameters.AWS.Type is required, so we must encode NLB or Classic, which means we are also forced to set the default in spec for this field. But that LBType default is already encoded in the status?

Was the type the only value that was needed to be added? For new clusters I guess this makes sense. But for upgrades, how would this behave, would it then populate spec, mirroring what's in the status? I guess that is probably ok. I think @deads2k had some opinion about this on the API office hours though, so maybe check with him as well.

Do you think over time that we are likely to want to enforce changing LB types? Eg blanket moving existing LBs to NLB from CLB? IIUC, this would not be something we would ever force change, and so encoding defaults in spec is in keeping with workload APIs. IIRC David seemed to think this was a configuration API though in which case what I'm saying here is not correct. Lets try and clarify what we think this is.

> Or, if we accept not to do spec defaulting this time and keep it dynamic, what do you think about making the subnets fields on the Ingress Config immutable as an alternative? 

That would certainly make things a little simpler in this regard. Have you got specific requests from PM about being able to mutate the subnets post cluster installation?

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 3: I guess on the defaulting front. Do we need to know if a particular Ingress object had the LB type set by the person who created the Ingress vs the admin defining a cluster wide default? When would we need to understand that difference/when would an admin/end user care?

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 3: > That's a great question. Since we'd take the cluster-wide defaults and put them in spec, we would no longer be able to distinguish between the cluster-wide defaults and the user-provided defaults. From a CIO perspective, it doesn't care where the default came from, it reconciles it the same. But from an end user perspective, they do lose the ability to distinguish whether they set the default, or the CIO chose a default for them. I don't have a concrete use case to mandate the need for distinguishing, but it is a noticeable change.

I think we want to take great consideration to this point. Perhaps having a wider conversation synchronously in the new year to understand how folks feel about this one might help us make a decision on the other parts of this defaulting story.

Everything here seems achievable, and feels like it's a direction we could take. But losing the ability to distinguish cluster wider vs individual user desire may be something we are not willing to lose

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Author: Yea I agree, we should talk about. I'll get something scheduled for the new year.

I just thought about @deads2k's [suggestion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Y-Z8gaKYv5dczbdwvXanbzBl-HjZ7zasRC0WaJGBWkA/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.4cri70x1dc7z) to create different structs in `status` to self-describe the usage. E.g. `status.globalDefaults.endpointPublishingStrategy`. That could be an approach for subnet defaulting if we wanted to keep the same patterns with spec, and possibly provide clarifications for other defaults to the users. The con is that `status` is still encoding a desired value (the default), but this might be the more acceptable compromise in this situation (vs changing the behavior of `spec` defaulting). Also, status is going to get longer, but maybe that's a just a mild inconvenience.

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 4: I don't love the idea of adding `status.globalDefaults` as it could get quite large, redundant, and even more confusing than the status quo.  However, if you all (Grant, Joel, and David) think it's a good idea, I can go along with it.  

Would the new `globalDefaults` field include all the settings we default, or would we set fields, such as `status.globalDefaults.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.classicLoadBalancer.subnets`, ad hoc and leave unnecessary fields empty?  

For that matter, would we re-use the `EndpointPublishingStrategy` type and other types we use for status, or would we define parallel types with only the fields we need in `globalDefaults`?  That could get really messy.  

---

Looking at this another way, I see mentioned a few ways determine the desired subnets for an IngressController:

(a) Autodetect subnets using tags.
(b) Inherit the subnets from the cluster ingress config on creation.
(c) Inherit the subnets from the cluster ingress config on first reconciliation.  
(c) Inherit the subnets from the cluster ingress config on every reconciliation.  

(a) is the behavior without this EP, and the implied behavior with this EP when the cluster ingress config doesn't have any subnets.  We seem to be debating whether the effect of specifying subnets in the cluster config should be (b), (c), or (d).  Right?  

Would it simplify matters if we made these behaviors into an explicit choice?  That is,

```yaml
kind: IngressController
spec:
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: LoadBalancerService
    loadBalancer:
      providerParameters:
        type: AWS
        aws:
          type: Classic
          classicLoadBalancer:
            # Option (a); the list must be empty.
            subnetSelection: AutodetectUsingTags
            subnets:
              ids: []
```
or
```yaml
            # Option (b); cluster-admin specifies the list on create.
            subnetSelection: ExplicitlyEnumerated
            subnets:
              ids:
              - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d0
              - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d1
```
or
```yaml
            # Option (c); controller specifies the list on first reconciliation
            # based on the cluster config.
            subnetSelection: AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate
            subnets:
              ids:
              - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d0
              - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d1
```
or
```yaml
            # Option (d); the list must be empty.
            subnetSelection: EnumeratedInClusterConfig
            subnets:
              ids: []
```

Making `subnetSelection` an explicit field helps in several ways:

- No need to persist defaults to status.  
- The field specifies explicitly who or what sets the fields when.
- We can use CEL to enforce most of the restrictions we want:
  - Prohibit updating `ids` for `ExplicitlyEnumerated`.
  - Prohibit specifying nonempty `ids` for `AutodetectUsingTags`.
  - Allow empty `ids` on creation but prohibit updating `ids` once the controller has set it for `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate`.  I don't know whether we can require the field to be empty on create.  In any case, CEL cannot prevent the cluster-admin from creating the IngressController and then immediately updating `ids` before the controller gets a chance to do it.  However, I think we can live with that gap.  
  - Prohibit specifying `ids` for `EnumeratedInClusterConfig`.  Ideally, we'd reject the IngressController if `EnumeratedInClusterConfig` or `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate` were specified without specifying any subnets in the cluster config, but we can't do that with CEL; it would need to be a controller admission check.  
- For `EnumeratedInClusterConfig`, we can document that the controller will report `Progressing=True` if the cluster config changes (that is, if the service annotation doesn't match the cluster config).  

For compatibility, I figure we will default to `AutodetectUsingTags` if the cluster-admin creates an IngressController without specifying `subnetSelection`.  If the operator creates the default IngressController, it  should use `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate` if the operator observes that the cluster config specifies subnets, and `AutodetectUsingTags` otherwise.  Otherwise, the cluster-admin can choose `ExplicitlyEnumerated` or `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate`.  

The more I think about it, I don't see a good use-case for `EnumeratedInClusterConfig`.  The only benefit over `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate` is that it provides some signal if the cluster-admin updates the cluster config and forgets to update the IngressController.  However, I would lean towards omitting `EnumeratedInClusterConfig`.  

So would making `subnetSelection` an explicit field help matters?

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 3: > The only benefit over AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate is that it provides some signal if the cluster-admin updates the cluster config and forgets to update the IngressController.

With current, defaulted status fields, if the cluster config is updated, these fields get updated _unless_ there is an IngressController spec field that is set and takes precedence over the cluster config.

So I think the current behaviour of most fields is a lot like C is it not? I think what we are trying to identify here is whether we should depart from that pattern, which would then require the admin to remember, for certain cluster config defaults, that they need to go update the IngressControllers manually, which again, sounds confusing

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Author: Thanks @Miciah for your detailed response. I think `subnetSelection` would be a verbose way of configuring subnet behavior. But I can't help but to feel that having an extra field to describe behavior of the API itself is a bit clunky. But this is something I'm trying to warm up to, as I find that APIs often have implicit behavior, usually following some sort of convention/pattern. With subnets, we have to develop a new defaulting convention/pattern, so the implicit behavior would be even less intuitive/expected.

> So I think the current behaviour of most fields is a lot like C is it not?

@JoelSpeed yea, the current behavior (e.g. like LBType) is that it gets persisted into status on first reconcile, so like C, but with status (not spec).

Maybe this is a good time to ask the question: is adding defaulting for subnets really worth the ROI? I interpreted Service Delivery's position as a "nice-to-have" defaulting. I also saw that `LBType` in Ingress Config defaults for custom IngressControllers. So nice-to-have + consistency, does it provide enough value to our users and product?

If we didn't have subnet defaulting, what would be the fallout? Users would have to copy the subnets from the `default` IngressController to their custom IngressController when they create them Day2, assuming they wanted the same config, right? Subnet defaulting doesn't enable any new functionality, it's just a UX convenience. Actually, since IC empty subnets (no-opinion) indicates Subnet Discovery, defaulting with the current `IngressControllerLB` role design actually totally prevents someone installing a cluster with explicit subnet configuration, and adding a custom ICs that uses subnet discovery (because it will always get defaulted). Maybe that's a use case to NOT default subnets. Or maybe we need separate `default` and custom IC subnet roles... 

We could rename the installer subnet role of `IngressControllerLB` to `DefaultIngressControllerLB`. That would 1. Be super explicit it only sets the `default` IngressController subnets, 2. Provide a clear path for user-created ICs subnet role to be added to the installer at a later date if it's requested (e.g. `CustomIngressControllerLB`).

So, don't take this as an effort to get myself out of doing extra work, but maybe it's someone we can punt on for the first iteration of this. If we frame IC subnet defaulting as its own RFE, would we reject it? I think punting on it would help lower the risk/scope of this proposal, as recently it has been growing.

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 3: It does appear that the defaulting is the most complex part of this feature at the moment.

I'd suggest discussing with the team and PM about whether you really need this. I think we probably want to make a decision that it's a now or never thing though, as retro-fitting the defaulting later could be trickier, eg we would have to work out upgrade issues for existing clusters.

I could however imagine it in the future as a new field to default the non default ICs as a way to implement this, but you're right, it does exclude then, any use of subnet discovery, which we've already agreed is the majority use case.

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Reviewer 4: > So I think the current behaviour of most fields is a lot like C is it not? I think what we are trying to identify here is whether we should depart from that pattern, which would then require the admin to remember, for certain cluster config defaults, that they need to go update the IngressControllers manually, which again, sounds confusing

The current behavior is A, `AutodetectUsingTags`, isn't it?  CCM autodetects tags, and it updates the subnets when the tags change, right? (Notwithstanding that reconciliation sometimes takes a while unless some other event triggers it.)

> I think `subnetSelection` would be a verbose way of configuring subnet behavior. But I can't help but to feel that having an extra field to describe behavior of the API itself is a bit clunky. But this is something I'm trying to warm up to, as I find that APIs often have implicit behavior, usually following some sort of convention/pattern. With subnets, we have to develop a new defaulting convention/pattern, so the implicit behavior would be even less intuitive/expected.

In my experience, whenever we identify an implicit API behavior, we try to make it more explicit.  This seems to me like any other instance where we added a union discriminator.  Once I got accustomed to the union-discriminator pattern, it started feeling less clunky.  (It still feels clunky when I'm typing out some json, but the verbosity is helpful when reading a manifest.)

> Maybe this is a good time to ask the question: is adding defaulting for subnets really worth the ROI?

An unspoken motivation for my proposal was to help us to think about which options and behaviors are useful.  Codifying these options and behaviors as discrete API values can be useful both for designing and for using the API.  We can omit options that don't make sense, and the `subnetSelection` field makes it trivial to extend the API to add these options (or others) later on should the need arise.  

Of course, if we end up deciding that there really is only one option that makes sense to implement at this time, then it probably will not make sense to add a union discriminator.  

> If we didn't have subnet defaulting, what would be the fallout? Users would have to copy the subnets from the `default` IngressController to their custom IngressController when they create them Day2, assuming they wanted the same config, right? Subnet defaulting doesn't enable any new functionality, it's just a UX convenience. 

Subnet defaulting refers to option C, `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate`, right?  This option would be a UX convenience over using installer manifests or explicitly specifying subnets.  As such, it might enable some workflows that were not previously possible (defaulting without using custom installer manifests, or workflows that use the same manifest on multiple clusters).  If the RFE doesn't call for enabling these workflows, then we don't need the option in the EP.  

> Actually, since IC empty subnets (no-opinion) indicates Subnet Discovery, defaulting with the current `IngressControllerLB` role design actually totally prevents someone installing a cluster with explicit subnet configuration, and adding a custom ICs that uses subnet discovery (because it will always get defaulted). Maybe that's a use case to NOT default subnets. Or maybe we need separate `default` and custom IC subnet roles...

I don't follow.  In any case, having these options (automatic defaulting, automatic detection using tags, or an explicit list) as explicit values enables all these use-cases and makes it clear which one is intended.  

> We could rename the installer subnet role of `IngressControllerLB` to `DefaultIngressControllerLB`. That would 1. Be super explicit it only sets the `default` IngressController subnets, 2. Provide a clear path for user-created ICs subnet role to be added to the installer at a later date if it's requested (e.g. `CustomIngressControllerLB`).

Does this mean that the ingress operator would specify the subnets specified as `DefaultIngressControllerLB` in the default IngressController when the operator created it?  So this is like option C, `AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate`, but only for the default IngressController?  It seems to me that it is potentially confusing to have global config that is only for the default IngressController, and it is only really useful for the use-case of install-time configuration without using custom installer manifests.  

> So, don't take this as an effort to get myself out of doing extra work

Laziness is the first great virtue of a programmer!

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Author: > The current behavior is A, AutodetectUsingTags, isn't it? CCM autodetects tags, and it updates the subnets when the tags change, right? (Notwithstanding that reconciliation sometimes takes a while unless some other event triggers it.)

Depends what field we are talking about, but yes:
- `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.[network|classic]LoadBalaner.subnets` = A (_AutodetectUsingTags_)
- `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.type` = C* (_AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate_)
-  `spec.domain` = C* (_AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate_)
\* Enumerates in _status_, not _spec_ and only when Ingress Config field is configured (so it's not _exactly_ C)

However, domain and lbType don't have the ability to do auto-detection like subnets, so the subnets API brings an extra "mode of operation".

> This seems to me like any other instance where we added a union discriminator

Yea, `subnetSelection` feels like type of API discriminator (not sure if that's the right word) that explicitly configures API behavior, aligns with the the union discriminator pattern. The more I think about it, the more I like that it makes the behavior explicit and it seems like the right option (that is _if_ we need defaulting).

> As such, it might enable some workflows that were not previously possible (defaulting without using custom installer manifests, or workflows that use the same manifest on multiple clusters). If the RFE doesn't call for enabling these workflows, then we don't need the option in the EP.

Right, there are some nuanced workflows that defaulting would (option C or D) enable. The RFE doesn't explicitly mention this, but this is something I can follow up with Service Delivery to be sure.

> I don't follow. In any case, having these options (automatic defaulting, automatic detection using tags, or an explicit list) as explicit values enables all these use-cases and makes it clear which one is intended.

Sorry, I meant with the current proposal in the EP, my brain defaulted back to the current EP state. My point was a solid argument to why my current EP proposal is insufficient, as it doesn't allow users to select for A (_AutodetectUsingTags_). So the two valid options I see are:
1. Not doing any type of Ingress Config defaulting (C or D)
2. Or using your suggestion of `subnetSelection` if we need defaulting.

> Does this mean that the ingress operator would specify the subnets specified as DefaultIngressControllerLB in the default IngressController when the operator created it? So this is like option C, AutomaticallyEnumeratedFromClusterConfigOnCreate, but only for the default IngressController? It seems to me that it is potentially confusing to have global config that is only for the default IngressController, and it is only really useful for the use-case of install-time configuration without using custom installer manifests.

Sorry, not quite what I meant, this is mutually exclusive from the `subnetSelection` suggestion (with no Ingress Config defaulting, C or D). I was referring to the current InstallConfig API proposal (now `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`) in this EP which introduces the concept of "roles". The current roles are (just recently evolving):
1. ClusterNode
2. IngressControllerLB
3. ControlPlaneExternalLB
4. ControlPlaneInternalLB

The `IngressControllerLB` role says "this subnet is designated as a IngressController subnet". Originally, I was thinking it would represent subnets for _all_ IngressControllers, but my suggestion now is that we should consider dropping defaulting for user-created IngressController, and just have the installer explicitly configure the `default` IngressController subnets in the manifest. But thinking about this more, I'm not totally sure. For extensibility, it may be better to be generic. If we make the role `DefaultIngressControllerLB`, then later we want to add `UserCreatedIngressControllerLB` or `CustomIngressControllerLB`, it feels clunky because they would have to also set `subnetSelection` to option C or D in the custom IngressController they created. That's two APIs you need to configure for defaulting and feels less of a convenience than just copying the subnets manually. But if it was generic (`IngressControllerLB`), we could morph it into both the `default` IngressController and the Ingress Config manifests since `subnetSelection` is an opt-in (one API to configure).

The other confusing thing that you eluded to is that: there wouldn't be such a thing as a user-created IngressController subnet default, defaults are for ALL IngressControllers, even the `default`. So if we chose `DefaultIngressControllerLB` now, extending to default subnets for all IngressControllers in the future would really be better described as `DefaultsForAllIngressControllerLB` or `IngressControllerLBDefaults`. Sorry, I'm rambling. I'm just thinking about extensibility impacts if we delay defaulting (C & D), and need to implement it later.

Questions:
1. If we drop subnet defaulting (C and D) requirement, should we still add the `subnetSelection` API with options A and B since those are the current API behavior (it's implicit today).
   - I think we need ratcheting because we'd need to default to A (auto selected), but if a cluster admin already configured subnets, `subnetSelection` needs to be set to B.
   - I suppose that this doesn't need to be done with this EP, but would be something we could do if we need to add defaulting (C & D) later.
2. If/when we did options C & D, what happen when the Ingress Config is blank? Do we reject the Ingress Controller admission? Does it assume that it's auto selection (A)?

> subnet change (described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

Author: I followed up with Bala from Service Delivery, and he confirmed that defaulting Day 2 IngressControllers is not a requirement and was okay with dropping it.

To reduce the scope of this enhancement, I'm planning to drop day 2 defaulting at this time, especially since @Miciah's `subnetSelection` suggestion paves a compatible way to do C & D type defaulting at a later time and in a separate enhancement (if it is ever requested). I'll capture `subnetSelection` suggestion as an alternative. 
 I think this will take a large chunk of the complexity out of this enhancement.

Please let me know if you have any concerns.

          roles:
          - Cluster
    [...]
    ```
2. The OpenShift Installer installs the cluster into the VPC where the cluster-role subnets exist, but does not
   configure any specific subnets for the `default` IngressController or `cluster` Ingress Config manifests.
3. When the `default` IngressController is created, the load balancer will automatically map to the appropriately
   tagged subnets in the VPC (see [AWS Subnet Discovery](#aws-subnet-discovery) for how subnets are discovered).

#### Specifying Dedicated IngressController-role Subnets During Installation with a BYO VPC Workflow

Specifying dedicated IngressController subnets enables cluster admins to isolate
IngressController subnets from the node subnets (i.e. cluster-role subnets):

1. Cluster admin creates an install-config with `platform.aws.subnetsConfig`, specifying
   each subnet to have either the `IngressController` or `Cluster` role in `platform.aws.subnetsConfig.roles`, but
   not both:
    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    baseDomain: devcluster.openshift.com
    metadata:
      name: my-cluster
    [...]
    platform:
      aws:
        region: us-east-2
        subnetsConfig:

>         - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d4 # AZ us-east-1
>           roles:
>           - Cluster
>         - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d5 # AZ us-east-1

Reviewer: @gcs278 - is the scope of this feature supporting only those subnets in the same AZ or targeting subnets created in different ones too? Example `IngressController`-role subnet created in `us-east-1a`, and `Cluster`-role subnet created in `us-east-1b`, placing only those two in the install-config as the example in this snippet.

Suggestion as subnets are created in AZ:

```suggestion
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d4 # AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - Cluster
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d5 # AZ us-east-1a
```

Author: This feature supports any combination of AZs for IngressController & Cluster roles (as long it's in the same VPC of course). So yes, you can have a IngressController-role in a different AZ than a Cluster-role subnet. This enables the "dedicated ingress controller subnet" use case (per Service Delivery's request).

Added suggestion.

Reviewer: Okay, so I would recommend to exercise the scenarios where subnets added to the ingress LB are different than nodes, and document AWS expected health check behavior somewhere here and/or in the product document if needed. Something like:

```yaml
    platform:
      aws:
        region: us-east-2
        subnetsConfig:
        - id: subnetID-private-use1a # AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - Cluster
        - id: subnetID-private-use1b # AZ us-east-1b
          roles:
          - IngressController
        lbType: NLB
```

IIRC we've discussed on Slack that scenario, and LBs will mark target as `unused`. In general that state would not be expected for operational/health targets. I have some questions: is the health check works as expected? how to remediate that (do we need)? do we have impact in the routing traffic? and in the operation(users seeing that unexpected health check state in AWS Console), do we need to provide additional information explaining about that behavior?

I know some of answers we've discussed there, but would be nice to have documented here too.

Author: Added a installer validation section `Reject IngressControllers AZs that do not match Cluster AZs`, take look and let me know if it makes sense. I think it answers your questions by just rejecting these scenarios.

  - We will reject private cluster installations using public IngressController-role subnets (see
    [Consistent Cluster Scope with IngressController-Role Subnets Validation](#consistent-cluster-scope-with-ingresscontroller-role-subnets-validation))
  - For private cluster installations using subnet discovery, public subnets will be excluded from the 
    `default` IngressControllers, provided the subnets are correctly tagged.

### Drawbacks

- Deprecating `platform.aws.subnets` will be painful for users.
- Distinguishing between BYO subnets/VPC and installer-created subnets/VPC may be confusing if we need
  to expand the `platform.aws.subnetsConfig` field in the future to accommodate installer-created
  subnets configuration.
  - For example, there may be a future desire to specify the IngressController role for installer-created subnets,
    and it is unclear how this API design would accommodate that.
- Defaulting subnets for _all_ IngressControllers and for load balancer type updates is complex and subtle.
  - As described in [Ingress Operator Updates](#ingress-operator-updates), we chose to do dynamic defaulting

>     for subnets because we don't have an existing mechanism to default the IngressController's spec yet.

Reviewer 3: What would it take to build that?

    // any subnets without the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag.
    //
    // For overridden subnet role selection, each subnet must have at
    // least one assigned role, and all roles (ClusterNode, IngressControllerLB,
    // ControlPlaneExternalLB, ControlPlaneInternalLB) must be assigned to
    // at least one subnet.
    // 
    // Leave this field unset to have the installer create subnets
    // in a new VPC on your behalf. subnets must contain unique IDs
    // and must not contain more than 10 subnets with the IngressController
    // role.
    // subnets is only available in TechPreview.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x.id == y.id))`,message="subnets cannot contain duplicate IDs" 
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.exists(x, x.roles.exists(r, r == 'ClusterNode'))`,message="subnets must contain at least 1 subnet with the ClusterNode role"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.filter(x, x.roles.exists(r, r == 'IngressControllerLB')).size() <= 10`,message="subnets must contain less than 10 subnets with the IngressControllerLB role"

>     Subnets []Subnet `json:"subnets,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: You should specify a sensible maximum length for this array

}

type Subnet struct {
    // id specifies the subnet ID of an existing subnet.
    // The subnet id must start with "subnet-", consist only
    // of alphanumeric characters, and must be exactly 24
    // characters long.
    //
    // +required
    ID AWSSubnetID `json:"id"`

    // rolesOverride manually overrides the roles (aka functions)
    // that the subnet will provide in the cluster. If no roles are
    // specified on any subnet, then the subnet roles are decided
    // automatically. Each role must be unique.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x == y))`,message="rolesOverride cannot contain duplicates"

>     RolesOverride []SubnetRole `json:"rolesOverride"`

Reviewer 3: You know how many possible roles there are, since it's an enum, so we can set a maximum length to this array

>     RolesOverride []SubnetRole `json:"rolesOverride"`

Reviewer 3: Are any of the roles mutually exclusive? Eg can I have a subnets that is both CPExternalLB and CPInternalLB?

Reviewer 3: Installer do generate a CRD from install-config for certain use cases, so the CEL isn't totally worthless

    // ControlPlaneInternalLBSubnetRole specifies subnets used by the internal control plane
    // load balancer that serves the Kubernetes API server.
    ControlPlaneInternalLBSubnetRole SubnetRole = "ControlPlaneInternalLB"
)
```

The `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` field will be introduced under the TechPreview feature gate, and `platform.aws.subnets`
will be deprecated when `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` graduates to GA.

##### Installer Validation Rules

These validation rules only apply to the new `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` field.

###### All or Nothing Subnet Roles Selection

This proposed API follows an "all or nothing" approach for roles: either all roles must be explicitly assigned
(manual role selection), or no roles must be assigned (automatic role selection). The installer must not allow a mix of
automatic and manual role assignments, as this could lead to confusing behavior. See [Allowing Mixed Automatic and Manual Subnet Selection Alternative](#allowing-mixed-automatic-and-manual-subnet-selection-alternative) for the reason behind this validation.

However, one exception is if the cluster is private (`installconfig.publish: Internal`), then

> ControlPlaneExternalLB can be omitted.

Reviewer 3: This should be documented in the field godoc

###### All Subnets Belong to the Same VPC Validation

The [existing validation](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/0d77aa8df5ddc68e926aa11da24a87981021b256/pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/subnet.go#L91)
for the deprecated `platform.aws.subnets` field ensuring all subnets belong to the same VPC
should apply to all subnets specified in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`.

###### Multiple Load Balancer Subnets in the Same AZ Validation

> The installer must reject multiple `IngressControllerLB` role subnets in the same AZ as this will be

Reviewer 2: We should probably reject these for the API LB as well.

Since the IngressController's API [only allows 10 subnets](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/ee5bb7eaf6b6638d4e3b33ba4ff0834212cdb75d/operator/v1/types_ingress.go#L564),
the installer must not allow more than 10 IngressController subnets as well.

###### Consistent Cluster Scope with IngressControllerLB Subnets Validation

The installer must not allow **any** public IngressControllerLB subnets for private clusters (`installconfig.publish: Internal`)
as this is a security risk as discussed in the [Do Not Use Untagged Subnets User Stories](#do-not-use-untagged-subnets-user-stories) section.

Conversely, the installer must now allow **any** private IngressControllerLB subnets for public clusters
(`installconfig.publish: External`) as the public IngressController will not function with private subnets.

###### Consistent Cluster Scope with ControlPlaneLB Subnets Validation

The installer must not allow **any** public subnets to be specified with the ControlPlaneInternalLB role and must
not allow **any** private subnets to be specified with the ControlPlaneExternalLB role.

Private clusters (`installconfig.publish: Internal`) should reject an install-config containing

> any ControlPlaneExternalLB roles, as only an internal control plane load balancer will be created.

Reviewer 2: Piggybacking on my earlier comment, I think we can avoid this validation and improve the user experience, by not separating `ControlPlaneExternalLB` and `ControlPlaneInternalLB` into separate values, but just have a `ControlPlaneLB` value and select the appropriate LB based on whether the subnet is public/private.

Reviewer 3: In this case, what would happen if all of the subnets were private? What would happen if they were all public? 

Is it not more obvious (from an early validation perspective) to require these separately, if we know that some should be public and some should be private?

Author: Holding off on combining ControlPlaneExternalLB/ControlPlaneInternalLB into ControlPlaneLB for now. Something we can discuss Monday.

###### Reject BYO VPC Installations that Contain Untagged Subnets

As described in [Rejecting Untagged Subnets Proposal](#rejecting-untagged-subnets-proposal), the installer
must not allow installation into an existing VPC if it contains subnets lacking the `kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id>`
tag when subnets roles are not specified. The error message should instruct the user to add a
`kubernetes.io/cluster/unmanaged` tag to any subnets they wish to exclude from this cluster installation or
configure the subnets with the Cluster or IngressController role in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`.

###### Reject IngressControllers or ControlPlaneLB AZs that do not match ClusterNode AZs

When manual role selection is specified, the installer must ensure that the AZs for the IngressController
(defined by the IngressControllerLB subnets) and control plane (defined by the ControlPlaneExternalLB and
ControlPlaneInternal subnets) match the cluster AZs (defined by the ClusterNode subnets). The installer must

> reject installations where the AZs are not equal.

Reviewer 2: For completeness, we will also need to ensure all azs specified in the machine pools `installConfig.compute` and `installConfig.controlPlane` have specified subnets.

subnet configuration.

1. Cluster admin creates an install-config with `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` specified
   with the subnet(s) while ensuring `platform.aws.vpc.subnets[].rolesOverride` is left empty:
    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    baseDomain: devcluster.openshift.com
    metadata:
      name: my-cluster
    #...
    platform:
      aws:
        region: us-east-1
        vpc:
          subnets:
          - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d2 # Private / AZ us-east-1a
          - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d3 # Public / AZ us-east-1a
    #...
    ```
2. The OpenShift Installer installs the cluster into the VPC where the subnets exist and automatically determines
   the role or purpose of each subnet. For IngressControllers, no specific subnet is explicitly assigned so that
   the AWS CCM will use [AWS Subnet Discovery](#aws-subnet-discovery) when creating the load balancer for the
   `default` IngressController.

### API Extensions

This proposal doesn't add any API extensions.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

This enhancement is directly enabling the https://issues.redhat.com/browse/XCMSTRAT-545

> feature for ROSA Hosted Control Planes.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me how/why this enhancement/feature blocks XCMSTRAT-545.

    [Consistent Cluster Scope with IngressControllerLB Subnets Validation](#consistent-cluster-scope-with-ingresscontrollerlb-subnets-validation))
  - **Mitigation**: For private cluster installations using subnet discovery for IngressControllers, public subnets will be excluded from the 
    `default` IngressControllers, provided the subnets are correctly tagged.
- **Risk**: Using public ControlPlaneInternalLB subnets which would expose the internal control plane API load balancer.
  - **Mitigation**: We will reject using public ControlPlaneInternalLB subnets (see
    [Consistent Cluster Scope with ControlPlaneLB Subnets Validation](#consistent-cluster-scope-with-controlplanelb-subnets-validation)).

### Drawbacks

- Deprecating `platform.aws.subnets` will be painful for users.
- Distinguishing between BYO subnets/VPC and installer-created subnets/VPC may be confusing if we need
  to expand the `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` field in the future to accommodate installer-created
  subnets configuration.
  - For example, there may be a future desire to specify the IngressController role for installer-created subnets,

>     and it is unclear how this API design would accommodate that.

Reviewer 2: This is a good point, but I **do think** the API design is extensible enough to handle this. An example implementation would be to make the subnet id optional, and when omitted the installer would create the subnet, and add an availability zone field. Something like:

```yaml
    platform:
      aws:
        region: us-east-1
        vpc:
          subnets:
          - availabilityZone: us-east-1a
            rolesOverride:
            - IngressControllerLB
            - ControlPlaneExternalLB
          - availabilityZone: us-east-1a
            rolesOverride:
            - ControlPlaneInternalLB
            - ClusterNode
```

- The all-or-nothing approach in [Automatic vs. Manual Role Selection](#automatic-vs-manual-role-selection) prevents
  users from specifying only a subset of roles to be automatically determined.
  - For example, a cluster admin might want to isolate the ClusterNode subnet from the ControlPlaneInternalLB subnet,
    but leave the IngressControllerLB subnets unspecified to rely on subnet discovery for the `default`
    IngressController. This combination is not currently supported.
  - While it may be possible to support mixed automatic and manual role selection in the future, the semantics of
    that configuration remain unclear (see
    [Allowing Mixed Automatic and Manual Subnet Selection Alternative](#allowing-mixed-automatic-and-manual-subnet-selection-alternative)).

## Open Questions

- Q: Should the install-config design assume all IngressControllerLB subnets are ClusterNode subnets too?
  - A: No, we must support dedicated IngressController subnet use cases.

> - Q: When using manual role selection, what subnet does the bootstrap node use? Do we need another role?

Reviewer 2: No, we don't need another role. The bootstrap node should be treated as a control plane node.

Author: Hmm, I'm not clear on this. Today for `platform.aws.subnets`, it will [use](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/fc463579baf4ecd75efbcc0aa2610a71f8186f95/pkg/asset/machines/clusterapi.go#L107) all public subnets if publish=external, or private if publish=internal. Since ClusterNode subnets are usually private subnets, I don't think it will be able to use them. 

With the new API, I suppose this is easy when roles are not specified, as it can easily do the same thing. But when roles are specified, my question is: should it ignore the specified roles and use all public or all private subnets in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`?

I agree it's probably an implementation detail rather than something we should expose as a new role, I'll document it as such.

Reviewer 2: I didn’t consider that the boostrap node on public clusters has a public ip and therefore needs to go onto a public subnet. That is a good point and worth ironing out.

So I take back that we don’t need another role: perhaps that is the best ux.

Author: Hmm, yea the more I think about it, the more it feels like another assumption the installer would need to make. Making it into a role would remove the installer's assumption for manual role selection mode. 

And to be clear, automatic role selection mode is going to make assumptions, but I that's it's goal, as it's the opinionated default. I think we need to keep manual mode as assumption-free as possible. So let me know if you think of any more "roles" of subnets.

- Q: Should we require the `OPENSHIFT_INSTALL_AWS_PUBLIC_ONLY` flag to be set when using `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`
  to assign ClusterNode roles to public subnets? Or should we disallow public ClusterNode subnets, and only enable

>   `OPENSHIFT_INSTALL_AWS_PUBLIC_ONLY`functionality in automatic role selection mode? Or a combination of both?

Reviewer 2: I suspect we want to do: 
> Or should we disallow public ClusterNode subnets, and only enable `OPENSHIFT_INSTALL_AWS_PUBLIC_ONLY`functionality in automatic role selection mode? 

The env var is only for CI cost saving (on nat gws), so we want to make sure to protect users and do the minimal amount we need to maintain ci.

Author: Sounds good. Done.

## Test Plan

### Installer Testing

> E2E test(s) will also be added to the installer to verify functionality of the new [Installer API](#installer-updates).

Reviewer 2: I think we should introduce a specific test that separates LBs onto a separate subnet from cluster nodes.

the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController. Note that
"default IngressController subnets" refers to the default subnets used by all IngressControllers, including
the `default` IngressController. This is different from "`default`-IngressController subnets", which specifically
means the subnets for the `default` IngressController.

### User-Created IngressControllers

A user-created IngressController is a custom IngressController that is created after installation (Day 2).
It represents all IngressControllers except for the `default` IngressController.

### Defining Subnets Roles

With the install-config now able to specify multiple ways a subnet could be used, it's important
to clarify what these uses are. We will define the function, purpose, or use of a subnet as a "role".
We use the concept of roles to recognize that a single subnet can simultaneously fulfill multiple roles.

Let's define the new subnet roles:

**ClusterNode Subnet Role**

Subnets with this role host the cluster nodes, including both control plane and compute nodes.
These are typically private subnets, though they can occasionally be public subnets in special scenarios.

> 

Reviewer: @gcs278 @patrickdillon this just came to my mind. Probably we'll need to add that role just for declarative when user is setting the subnets manually. WDYT?

```suggestion

**EdgeNode Subnet Role**

Subnets with this role host nodes running in AWS edge zones, Local Zones or Wavelength Zones. These subnets is not candidate to be used to create Kube API or IngressController LBs, but must be classified when manual role is added on install-config.yaml.
```

Author: Good question @mtulio. I think I see your point for `EdgeNode` as being more declarative / explicit? I was originally thinking we'd just allow local zones to be `ClusterNode` roles, which indicates an Edge Node. To illustrate my point:
```yaml
# These two examples are equivalent configuration:
      - id: subnet-local-zone-01 # LocalZone / AZ us-east-local-1a
        roles:
        - ClusterNode
# and ...
       - id: subnet-local-zone-01 # LocalZone / AZ us-east-local-1a
        roles:
        - EdgeNode
```

So, back to the question in debate: how declarative should we be? Maybe we should consider using the structured role approach for this:
```yaml
      - id: subnet-local-zone-01 # LocalZone / AZ us-east-local-1a
        roles:
        - type: Node
          zoneType: Cluster ..or.. Edge
```

@JoelSpeed any thoughts on extending the declarative pattern to this situation? I think @mtulio has a point, if we are being declarative with `ControlPlaneLB` scope, I feel like `EdgeNode` shouldn't be exempt either. 

I do agree there should be validation to reject local zone subnets as `IngressControllerLB` or `ControlPlaneLB` subnet roles, I'll add that to the EP.

Reviewer: > I think I see your point for `EdgeNode` as being more declarative / explicit?

Yes.

> I was originally thinking we'd just allow local zones to be `ClusterNode` roles, which indicates an Edge Node.

That's makes sense to me as long we can't assume all subnets of `ClusterNode`'s zones should in the LB list (e.g. private).

As mentioned in the meeting, in BYO VPC flow, the subnets in Local or Wavelength Zones will be classified as edge subnets, ungroup from regular zones, used to generate machine manifests, that classification will prevent using those in any LB creation by installler. This is more UI while the EP is proposing expand subnet configuration for BYO VPC, we need to make sure users will not make mistakes while filling the new convention.

Also discussed in the call today: if the plan to expand the `ClusterNode` to "compute pool" (`ControlPlaneNode` and `ComputeNode`) proceed, it would be nice to evaluate the `EdgeNode` too as it is also another compute pool.

Author: > That's makes sense to me as long we can't assume all subnets of ClusterNode's zones should in the LB list (e.g. private).

Yea great point. It's another assumption that the installer has to make if we keep EdgeNodes combined with `ClusterNode`, similar to the debate about `ControlPlaneLB` combining both public/private subnets. And I think we want the API to be declarative and less ambiguous. Though, determining if a subnet is a local/edge subnet is trivial, I think @JoelSpeed's point is that we should be careful about "baking in" these assumption into our API.

> Also discussed in the call today: if the plan to expand the ClusterNode to "compute pool" (ControlPlaneNode and ComputeNode) proceed, it would be nice to evaluate the EdgeNode too as it is also another compute pool.

I skipped over this in our meeting because lack of time, but I wish I talked about it. I theory, adding `ComputeNode` and `ControlPlaneNode` we could deprecate `controlPlane.platform.aws.zones` and `compute.platform.aws.zones`, but I'm not sure of the benefit of doing so. Maybe there is a desire to centralize the "zone" configuration to a single API structure (subnets). @patrickdillon @mtulio Thoughts?

Regardless, I think I see value in separating `EdgeNodes` from `ClusterNodes`, even if we don't separate `ComputeNodes` and `ControlPlaneNodes`, so that we make the API more declarative and remove assumptions that the installer has to make.

Reviewer 3: > Regardless, I think I see value in separating EdgeNodes from ClusterNodes, even if we don't separate ComputeNodes and ControlPlaneNodes, so that we make the API more declarative and remove assumptions that the installer has to make.

IIUC, I'm +1 to this

Reviewer: > > Regardless, I think I see value in separating EdgeNodes from ClusterNodes, even if we don't separate ComputeNodes and ControlPlaneNodes, so that we make the API more declarative and remove assumptions that the installer has to make.
> 
> IIUC, I'm +1 to this

+1

(manual role selection), or no roles must be assigned (automatic role selection). The installer must not allow a mix of
automatic and manual role assignments, as this could lead to confusing behavior. See [Allowing Mixed Automatic and Manual Subnet Selection Alternative](#allowing-mixed-automatic-and-manual-subnet-selection-alternative) for the reason behind this validation.

However, one exception is if the cluster is private (`installconfig.publish: Internal`), then
ControlPlaneExternalLB can be omitted.

###### All Subnets Belong to the Same VPC Validation

The [existing validation](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/0d77aa8df5ddc68e926aa11da24a87981021b256/pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/subnet.go#L91)
for the deprecated `platform.aws.subnets` field ensuring all subnets belong to the same VPC
should apply to all subnets specified in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`.

###### Multiple Load Balancer Subnets in the Same AZ Validation

The installer must reject multiple IngressControllerLB subnets in the same AZ as this will be
rejected by the AWS CCM.

###### The Old and New Subnets Fields Cannot be Specified Together Validation

> Since `platform.aws.subnets` will be deprecated, the installer must not allow `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` and

Reviewer 5: When both are specified, configuration provided in `platform.aws.subnets` would be ignored and `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` would be used?

Author: The EP currently says both specified together will be rejected. If you think it should continue regardless, let me know. To me, it felt safest to just consider it an invalid configuration. See https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/8f4042b627eac2287c28e2eb871fee55c5b9cc93/enhancements/installer/aws-lb-subnet-selection.md?plain=1#L435-L438

Author: @sadasu are you referring to [`ConvertInstallConfig`](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/85a3545ebcb9166a6fa8986747dfd6e878860bb3/pkg/types/conversion/installconfig.go#L26) and the "upconvert" process? I'm just seeing that now.

I suppose converting `platform.aws.subnets` to the new `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` is pretty easy. Is the motivation for upconverting to keep the installer code simpler? So it doesn't have to maintain two separate code paths for each API?

Reviewer 2: I think upconversion and the validation as described (reject if both are supplied) is the right way of handling it. 

To deprecate: we replace all usage of `subnets` with `vpc.subnets`, upconvert `subnets` anytime it is supplied, then after a few releases remove `subnets`

Author: Got it. I'll add a small snippet about the upconversion process, though I know I'm getting a bit deep in implementation details at this point.

> then after a few releases remove subnets

Hmm I have the non-goal I might need to revise: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/8f4042b627eac2287c28e2eb871fee55c5b9cc93/enhancements/installer/aws-lb-subnet-selection.md#L245

I was under the impression we must bump API versions to remove a field, since it's a breaking change. I think the InstallConfig has been on `v1` for a long time now. Does the InstallConfig use different rules on API compatibility here?

Reviewer 2: For past deprecations the installconfig has ignored the API rules for version bumps when removing a field. 

I don’t think we need to remove the field in this case, so we could tweak my deprecation outline to something like

> then remove subnets at the next installconfig version bump

`platform.aws.subnets` to both be specified.

###### Maximum of 10 IngressController Subnets Validation

Since the IngressController's API [only allows 10 subnets](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/ee5bb7eaf6b6638d4e3b33ba4ff0834212cdb75d/operator/v1/types_ingress.go#L564),

> the installer must not allow more than 10 IngressController subnets as well.

Reviewer 5: Is this also the max count for subnet with other roles?

Author: No, just a restriction on the IngressControllerLB subnets.

Control Plane Load Balanacers subnets don't have a limit restriction enforced by the [CAPA API](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/6f39575f584a3fe5304f0cb08baa982026bb3bb9/vendor/sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-provider-aws/v2/api/v1beta2/awscluster_types.go#L215). And I don't see any subnet count limit for compute or control plane nodes in the Installer.

But either way, you won't be able to specify duplicate AZs (see existing [validateDuplicateSubnetZones](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/358ca0f104e80ce081f954b70d81a10a23617971/pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/validation.go#L451) for each role. I'll add a small snippet about this in the EP.

Reviewer 5: Prefect. Thanks!

The installer will configure the ClusterNode subnets in each of the `spec.subnet` fields of the CAPA AWSMachine
objects for the control plane nodes and in the subnet field of the MachineSets for the compute nodes.

##### Installer Subnet Tagging

All public and private subnets specified in the `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` field, regardless of their role, must be
tagged with the `kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id>: shared` tag. Currently, edge subnets are not tagged by the
installer and should continue to be excluded. These tags assist the AWS CCM in identifying which subnets to use
during [AWS Subnet Discovery](#aws-subnet-discovery) for both the cluster being installed and any other clusters
that may be installed within the same VPC.

##### Installer Subnet Deprecated API Conversion

As `platform.aws.subnets` is being deprecated, the existing upconversion process should convert it into
`platform.aws.vpc.subnets` to maintain backwards compatibility with the old API. Caution must be taken to
ensure that any new behaviors introduced in the new API, such as
[Reject BYO VPC Installations that Contain Untagged Subnets](#reject-byo-vpc-installations-that-contain-untagged-subnets),

> are not inadvertently applied to the old API.

Reviewer 3: If this feature is introduced in a y-stream, do we consider this behaviour a breaking change still?

Reviewer 2: It's a good question, but I'm not sure if there is a clear answer. From my perspective it depends on how customers would interpret the validation, where they could say either:

a. I've been using this VPC in prior versions and am surprised to discover ingress LBs are getting sent to subnets I didn't specify; or,
b. I've been using this VPC to install prior versions and it's always worked, now it's broken. I don't care where the ingress controller goes. More work! :sob:

I don't have any insight which way the responses would fall. I think we have a good justification for enforcing the validation on the old field, but the hesitation is that we "break" existing workflows. Personally I have a weakly held opinion that the slow introduction of the validation through the new field is all we need.

Author: +1 to @patrickdillon response. If we did enforce it on the "old" API (`platform.aws.subnets`), compatibility is a grey area. Though there is a workaround (aka tag the subnets), we still would be changing installer behavior, so strictly speaking, it doesn't feel like a compatible update. 

But to be clear, I wasn't intending for this validation to happen when the old (`platform.aws.subnets`) field is specified, only when the new field (`platform.aws.vpc.subnets`) is specified. So, as the EP is currently written, I don't see this validation as a breaking change in any x-y-z stream update because it's only enforced with the new API.

Reviewer 3: Oh totally, as the EP stands today there's no breaking changes, everything is very safe. Contrary to normal, I was actually wondering if we are being overly cautious here. It's fine as it is, but I don't think it would cause too much outrage if we did enforce the new validation (and therefore risk fewer bugs in the future?) on the older API too, as long as it's a Y stream change.

We have made much larger Y stream changes in the installer in the past (see Terraform to CAPI)

          roles:
          - type: IngressControllerLB
          - type: Bootstrap
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d6 # Public / AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - type: ControlPlaneExternalLB
          - type: Bootstrap
  #...
  ```
- ClusterNodes on public subnets so that they are externally accessible:
  ```yaml
  #...
      vpc:
        subnets:
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d4 # Private / AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - type: ControlPlaneInternalLB
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d5 # Public / AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - type: ClusterNode
          - type: IngressControllerLB
          - type: ControlPlaneExternalLB
          - type: Bootstrap
  #...
  ```
- Cluster installation with EdgeNodes:
  ```yaml
  #...
      vpc:
        subnets:
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d4 # Private / AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - type: ClusterNode
          - type: ControlPlaneInternalLB
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d5 # Public / AZ us-east-1a
          roles:
          - type: IngressControllerLB
          - type: ControlPlaneExternalLB
          - type: Bootstrap

>         - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910e0 # Private / Local Zone us-east-dca-1a

Reviewer: Not sure if `dca` Local Zone exists, suggest to keep a valid just for consistency: 
```suggestion
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910e0 # Private / Local Zone us-east-1-dfw-1a
```

Reviewer: Currently, the public edge subnets is also valid, the installer will not use it when creating machineset manifests, but it can be used in day-2 to deploy ingress (eg using ALBO/ALBC), or even deploying nodes in public subnets when patching manifests[2] (useful in edge zones where ALB isn't supported yet). Commenting here just to make sure we'll not apply restrictions/validations to private-only on edge subnets:

```yaml
      - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910e1 # Public / Local Zone us-east-1-dfw-1a
        roles:
        - type: EdgeNode
```

[1] https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/installing/installing_aws/ipi/installing-aws-localzone.html#installation-creating-aws-vpc-localzone_installing-aws-localzone

[2] https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/installing/installing_aws/ipi/installing-aws-localzone.html#installing-with-edge-node-public_installing-aws-localzone

Author: Good point. I wasn't aware that we allowed edge nodes to use public subnets currently. I will add a note about that.

---
title: aws-lb-subnet-selection
authors:
- "@gcs278"
reviewers:
- "@candita"
- "@frobware"
- "@rfredette"
- "@alebedev87"
- "@miheer"
- "@Miciah"
- "@mtulio"
approvers:
- "@patrickdillon"
api-approvers:
- "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2024-05-29
last-updated: 2025-01-13
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CORS-3440
see-also:
  - "enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md"
replaces:
  - "enhancements/installer/aws-customer-provided-subnets.md"
superseded-by:
---

# Installer LoadBalancer Subnet Selection for AWS

## Summary

This proposal extends the OpenShift Installer's install-config for AWS to enable install-time configuration
of subnets for the `default` IngressController as well as the control plane load balancers and nodes.
It also fixes a common issue where load balancers would map to unintended subnets ([OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432)).

To achieve this, this enhancement deprecates the existing install-config field `platform.aws.subnets`

> in favor of a more flexible configuration field that handles specifying subnets for IngressControllers,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
in favor of a more flexible and optional configuration field that handles specifying subnets for IngressControllers,
```

### Defining Subnets Roles

With the install-config now able to specify multiple ways a subnet could be used, it's important
to clarify what these uses are. We will define the function, purpose, or use of a subnet as a "role".
We use the concept of roles to recognize that a single subnet can simultaneously fulfill multiple roles.

Let's define the new subnet roles:

| Role                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Allowed Subnet Scope                                        | 
|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ClusterNode            | Host the cluster nodes, including both control plane and compute nodes in standard availability zones (excluding local zones).                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Private [^1]                                                |

Reviewer 5: Nit:

```suggestion
| ClusterNode            | Subnet hosts the cluster nodes, including both control plane and compute nodes in standard availability zones (excluding local zones).                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Private [^1]                                                |
```
Similar Nit for other `Description`. Only because `Host` could mean a compute resource too.

| ControlPlaneExternalLB | Host the control plane's **external** load balancer that serves the Kubernetes API server. Only created for externally published clusters.                                                                                                                                                                                       | Public                                                      |
| ControlPlaneInternalLB | Host the control plane **internal** load balancers that serves the Kubernetes API server. Always created for all clusters.                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Private                                                     |
[^1]: Can be public for OPENSHIFT_INSTALL_AWS_PUBLIC_ONLY

_Note: These roles are defined only to establish a common language within the context of the install-config
and may not be applicable to other environments, situations, or APIs._

### Clarifying Subnet Roles Terminology

> For simplicity, "IngressControllerLB subnets," "ControlPlaneExternalLB subnets," "ControlPlaneInternalLB subnets",

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This proposal is designed to take care of subnets serving multiple roles. 
```
We don't need to list the roles again here, reducing the burden of updating in multiple places if the list changes or their names change. I hope the suggestion provided doesn't take away from the original intent.

Reviewer 3: I think this is a matter of personal opinion, I tend to find being more verbose, as the text is currently, reduces potential for ambiguity. Either is fine though

- The load balancer is external (internet facing) and the subnet is private.
- A subnet for the same AZ has already been chosen based on lexicographical order.
- The subnet type is a `wavelength` or `local`.

_Note: Subnet discovery, as defined here, applies only to IngressControllerLB subnets and not to ControlPlaneLB subnets.
While the Cluster API Provider AWS ([CAPA](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws)) does some subnet
filtering, it relies on the list of [provided subnets](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/8f46a4d34d18cb090a4b48c9a9260cd3dffd9162/api/v1beta2/network_types.go#L340)
from the openshift-installer. As a result, ControlPlaneLB subnets are NOT impacted by [OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432)._

However, the current subnet discovery implementation has some limitations:

- It selects subnets that lack the `kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id>` tag ([OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432))
- It doesn't support use cases such as [Dedicated Load Balancer Subnets User Story](#dedicated-load-balancer-subnets-user-story)

> The goal of this enhancement is not to completely bypass or replace subnet discovery by hardcoding the

Reviewer 5: Nit: I think this belongs in the "Motivation" section.

So, presence of this config bypasses subnet discovery. What is the customer specifies subnets with all roles except for `ClusterNode'. Would that be a valid config and we will fall back to subnet discovery just for that role OR will that be considered invalid config?

Reviewer 5: I see that this question is answered in the "Automatic vs. Manual Role Selection" section.

| Bootstrap              | Yes                       | Installer                | Public or Private                                          |
| IngressControllerLB    | Yes                       | AWS CCM                  | Public for External Cluster, Private for Internal Clusters |
| ControlPlaneExternalLB | Yes (if external cluster) | Installer (CAPA)         | Public                                                     |
| ControlPlaneInternalLB | Yes                       | Installer (CAPA)         | Private                                                    |
[^1]: Describes what type of subnets will be selected for this role in automatic role selection.
[^2]: Public for OPENSHIFT_INSTALL_AWS_PUBLIC_ONLY

### Rejecting Untagged Subnets Proposal

In BYO VPCs, untagged subnets are nuisance as the AWS CCM may select them, leading to various bugs, RFEs, and
support cases. Since this proposal introduces a new subnet install-config field, it's a great opportunity
to introduce a new behavior which will provide a better user experience. If `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`
is using automatic role selection (i.e. subnet discovery), the installer will inspect the VPC for untagged

> subnets not already specified in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` and reject the installation if any exist.

Reviewer 2: Our conversation around upconversion made me realize that I do not think we can reject this field only when set to `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` (and not reject with `platform.aws.subnets`). 

One thing that comes to mind is that we switch this to a warning in the installer... if users tag the "extra" subnets day 2, is that handled gracefully? 

The problem is that installer warnings get lost in the noise of the install logs and we have work to do there for it to be truly effective.

Reviewer 5: Can we augment validation for `platform.aws.subnets`  to include this even when it is being deprecated?

Reviewer 2: I realize now my original comment is more of an implementation detail; and also realize now how to handle it.

i havent implemented a deprecation before but the pattern i have seen is that we will rename the underlying go type to `DeprecatedSubnets` and replace all usage with the new type, including in validation code. 

Now I see we can indeed do this if we skip a validation if `DeprecatedSubnets != nil`

It's important to note that while the installer will reject additional untagged subnets during installation,

> a cluster admin can still add untagged subnets after installation (Day 2), which may cause IngressControllers

Reviewer 5: "IngressControllers" here includes the "Default" and other IngressControllers ?

> to automatically use these new subnets. This proposal does not attempt to prevent this type of misconfiguration.

Reviewer 2: When considering the problems with installer validation of this, one thing that came to mind was whether the ingress controller could emit some sort of alert in this case. I don't know much about this topic, so not sure if it's viable/appropriate.

            roles:
            - type: IngressControllerLB
            - type: ControlPlaneLB
            - type: Bootstrap
          - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d1 # private / us-east-1a
            roles:
            - type: ControlPlaneLB
            - type: ClusterNode
        lbType: Classic
    #...
    ```
2. The OpenShift Installer uses the subnets based on their specified roles, configuring the ControlPlaneExternalLB,
   ControlPlaneInternalLB, and ClusterNode subnets in the appropriate CAPA objects. For IngressControllerLB subnets,
   it populates the `default` IngressController manifest with them and installs the cluster into the existing VPC:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
   kind: IngressController
   metadata:
     name: default
     namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
   spec:
     #...
     endpointPublishingStrategy:
       type: LoadBalancerService
       loadBalancer:
         scope: External
         providerParameters:
           type: AWS
           aws:
             type: Classic
             classicLoadBalancer:
               subnets:
                 ids:
                 - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d0

>                  - subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d1

Author: ```suggestion
```

should apply to all subnets specified in `platform.aws.vpc.subnets`.

###### Multiple Load Balancer Subnets in the Same AZ Validation

The installer must reject multiple IngressControllerLB subnets in the same AZ as this will be
rejected by the AWS CCM.

###### The Old and New Subnets Fields Cannot be Specified Together Validation

Since `platform.aws.subnets` will be deprecated, the installer must not allow `platform.aws.vpc.subnets` and
`platform.aws.subnets` to both be specified.

###### Maximum of 10 IngressController Subnets Validation

Since the IngressController's API [only allows 10 subnets](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/ee5bb7eaf6b6638d4e3b33ba4ff0834212cdb75d/operator/v1/types_ingress.go#L564),
the installer must not allow more than 10 IngressController subnets as well.

###### Consistent Cluster Scope with IngressControllerLB Subnets Validation

The installer must not allow **any** public IngressControllerLB subnets for private clusters (`installconfig.publish: Internal`)
as this is a security risk as discussed in the [Do Not Use Untagged Subnets User Stories](#do-not-use-untagged-subnets-user-stories) section.

> Conversely, the installer must now allow **any** private IngressControllerLB subnets for public clusters

Reviewer 6: @gcs278 Adding this for future reference and removing the hold to signal my review.  If I'm wrong about this, please let me know.
```suggestion
Conversely, the installer must not allow **any** private IngressControllerLB subnets for public clusters
```

Author: Whoops, yea that was a typo, good catch. If I have time tomorrow  I might follow up with a tiny pr to fix this.

---
title: aws-lb-subnet-selection
authors:
- "@gcs278"
reviewers:
- "@candita"
- "@frobware"
- "@rfredette"
- "@alebedev87"
- "@miheer"
- "@Miciah"
- "@mtulio"
approvers:
- "@patrickdillon"
api-approvers:
- None
creation-date: 2024-05-29
last-updated: 2024-06-20
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CORS-3440
see-also:
  - "enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md"
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Installer LoadBalancer Subnet Selection for AWS

## Summary

This enhancement extends the OpenShift Installer's install-config, enabling cluster admins to
configure subnets for AWS load balancers created for their IngressControllers at install time.

> This configuration sets the subnets for both the default IngressController and the default
> subnets for all new IngressControllers at install time.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This proposal allows the install-time configuration of subnets for the default IngressController as well as the default subnets for any new IngressController.
```

This enhancement also deprecates the existing install-config field `platform.aws.subnets`

> in favor for a more flexible configuration field that handles both IngressController subnet

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
in favor of a more flexible configuration field that handles both IngressController subnet
```

> selection (ingress subnets) and cluster resource subnet selection (cluster subnets).

Reviewer 6: We don't have the latter as a use case.  Why is it being covered in this proposal?

## Motivation

Cluster admins using AWS may have dedicated subnets for their load balancers due to
security reasons, architecture, or infrastructure constraints. They may be installing
a cluster into a VPC with multiple Availability Zones (AZs), but they wish to restrict
their cluster to a single AZ.

> Currently, cluster admins can configure their load balancer subnets by configuring

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Currently, cluster admins can only configure their load balancer subnets after installation, by configuring
```

the `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` field
on the IngressController (see [LoadBalancer Subnet Selection for AWS](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md)).

> However, this approach is only supported as a Day 2 operation, but cluster admins also
> need a way to configure ingress subnets at install time (Day 1).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Cluster admins also need a way to configure ingress subnets at install time (Day 1).
```

Configuring subnets at install time is essential for cluster admins that want to
ensure their default IngressController is configured properly from the start. Additionally,
Service Delivery has use cases for ROSA Hosted Control Plane (HCP) that require specific
IngressController subnets to be configured during cluster installation.

### User Stories

> #### Day 1 Ingress Controller Subnet Selection on AWS

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Day 1 Defautl Ingress Controller Subnet Selection on AWS
```

_"As a cluster admin, when installing a cluster in AWS, I want to specify the
default subnet selection for my IngressControllers."_

See [Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

#### Installing a Private Cluster with Private Subnets in AWS

_"As a cluster admin, when installing a private cluster in AWS, I want to
specify that the default IngressController should use private subnets, so
that it is not exposed to the public Internet."_

When a cluster admin installs a private cluster into a VPC also containing
public subnets lacking the proper tags, internal LoadBalancer-type services

> may inadvertently use both the public and private subnets, unknowingly introducing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
may use the misconfigured public subnets, introducing
```

a security risk (see related [RFE-2816](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-2816) and
[OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432)).

As a workaround to this type of issue, cluster admins may want to specify the private
subnet list to ensure that the default IngressController exclusively uses the private
subnets. See [Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

#### ROSA HCP: 1 MachinePool in 1 Availability Zone

_"As a user of ROSA HCP, I want to install a cluster with 1 MachinePool in 1
Availability Zone and have my default IngressController only mapped to the subnets
in that Availability Zone."_

Similar to [Day 1 IngressController Subnet Selection on AWS](#day-1-ingress-controller-subnet-selection-on-aws).

When a cluster is installed into a VPC containing other subnets in different

> AZs than the cluster subnets, the default IngressController may map to subnets
> in the AZs that are not part of the cluster. This creates a security risk
> because the load balancer is mapping to subnets that may belong to other clusters. This

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
AZs than the cluster subnets, there is no mechanism for the default IngressController 
to know which subnets and AZs are a part of the cluster.
This lack of discoverable information creates a security risk
because the load balancer may map to subnets that may belong to other clusters. This
```

user story is derived from [OCM-5969](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCM-5969).

See [Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

#### ROSA HCP: Adding a 2nd MachinePool

_"As a user of ROSA HCP, I want to install a cluster with 1 MachinePool in 1
AZ, then add a 2nd MachinePool in another AZ and update my IngressController's

> subnets to map to the new AZ."_

Reviewer 6: This use case is not an installation option, is it?  If not, it doesn't belong in this proposal.

A user installed a ROSA HCP cluster with 1 MachinePool in one AZ similar to
[ROSA HCP: 1 MachinePool in 1 Availability Zone](#rosa-hcp-1-machinepool-in-1-availability-zone),
but now they want to add another machine pool in a different AZ. The user
would need to adjust the existing default IngressController subnets by following
the workflow [Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow](/enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md#updating-an-existing-ingresscontroller-with-new-subnets-workflow).

Additionally, if the user wants all future IngressController to the new subnet by default, see
[Updating the Default Subnets for New IngressControllers Workflow](#updating-the-default-subnets-for-new-ingresscontrollers-workflow).

#### Dedicated Ingress Subnets for Security

_"As a cluster admin, I want to install a cluster with dedicated IngressController

> subnets in order to have load balancer VIPs on a dedicated VLAN for applying ACLs."_

Reviewer 6: Does this apply only to non-default (custom) ingress controllers?  If so, please specify.

A cluster admin wants their load balancers mapped to separate subnet(s), allowing
firewall ACL rules to specifically target the load balancer VLAN
(see https://access.redhat.com/support/cases/#/case/03054638). The dedicated subnet(s)
must be located in the same AZ(s) as the provided cluster subnets; otherwise,
the IngressController will not function properly.

See [Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

### Goals

- Deprecate the `platform.aws.subnets` field in the install-config and replace with a
  more flexible subnet structure for subnet-related configuration.
- Add a new field in the install-config for IngressController subnet selection for AWS.
- Provide install-time validation for user provided ingress subnets.
- Support configuring the default IngressController's subnets at install time for AWS.
- Support configuring default subnets for all new IngressControllers at install time for AWS.

> - Support updating the default subnets for all new IngressControllers.

Reviewer 6: Is it possible to be updating at install time?

### Non-Goals

- Extend support to platforms other than AWS.
- Automatically restrict IngressController subnet selection for private clusters to ensure the cluster stays private.

> - Assume that bring-your-own (BYO) cluster subnets are also ingress subnets by default.

Reviewer 6: I feel we shouldn't be mentioning cluster subnets at all in this proposal.

- Support configuring subnets for LoadBalancer-type Services that aren't associated with an IngressController.

## Proposal

To enable cluster admins to specify IngressController subnets at install time, we will need
to make the following API updates:

1. Deprecate the `platform.aws.subnets` field in the install-config and replace with
   `platform.aws.subnetsConfig`, which more intuitively manages both cluster and ingress subnets selection.
2. Add the `Subnets` field to `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.subnets` in the IngressConfig

>    to encode the default subnets for IngressControllers.

Reviewer 6: Do you mean we'll end end with a field called `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.subnets.subnets`?

The proposal to deprecate the `platform.aws.subnets` field in the install-config is driven by
its ambiguity, as it does not clearly distinguish between ingress subnets and cluster
subnets, which can be different. Additionally, `platform.aws.subnets` is a `[]string` and doesn't
allow for future expansion or adaptation for other subnet type, roles, or metadata information.

The IngressConfig holds the default values that the Ingress Operator will use when creating
the default IngressController, as well as any new IngressController. The IngressConfig will be
populated by the installer, similar to how the [Allow Users to specify Load Balancer Type during installation for AWS](/enhancements/installer/aws-load-balancer-type.md)
enhancement handled `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.lbType`.

The OpenShift Installer will be updated to support the new `platform.aws.subnetsConfig` field, and the
Ingress Operator will be updated to apply the `Subnets` field in the IngressConfig as the default subnets
for new IngressControllers.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> As mentioned in [Proposal](#proposal), the install-config and the IngressConfig will be updated

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
As mentioned in [the Proposal section](#proposal), the install-config and the IngressConfig will be updated
```

to support propagating default subnets to all new IngressControllers, including the default
IngressController. The Ingress Operator will also need to be updated to use the new IngressConfig
`Subnet` field.

#### Installer Updates

The `platform.aws.subnets` field in the install-config will be deprecated and replaced with a new
field, `platform.aws.subnetsConfig`. Much like `Subnets`, the new `SubnetsConfig` field indicates
a list of subnets in a pre-existing VPC, but also provide the role that the subnet will fulfill in the
cluster. Additionally, since it is a struct and not a `[]string`, it provide the ability to be
expanded with additional subnet-related fields in the future.

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`!(has(self.subnets) && has(self.subnetsConfig))`,message="cannot use both subnets and subnetsConfig"
type Platform struct {
	[...]
    // Subnets specifies existing subnets (by ID) where cluster
    // resources will be created.  Leave unset to have the installer
    // create subnets in a new VPC on your behalf.

> 	//

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   //
```

    // Deprecated: Use SubnetsConfig
    //
    // +optional
    Subnets []string `json:"subnets,omitempty"`

	// SubnetsConfig specifies the subnet configuration for
	// a cluster by specifying a list of subnet ids with their

> 	// designated role. At least one Cluster role subnet must be

Reviewer 6: I'll come back to this after hearing more about the inclusion of Cluster subnets in the proposal.

	// specified. If no Ingress role subnets are specified, the
	// IngressController's Load Balancer will automatically discover
	// its subnets based on the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag,
	// whether it's public or private, and the availability zone.
	// Leave this field unset to have the installer create subnets
	// in a new VPC on your behalf.
	//
	// +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x.id == y.id))`,message="subnetsConfig cannot contain duplicate IDs"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.exists(x, x.roles.exists(r, r == 'Cluster'))`,message="subnetsConfig must contain at least 1 subnet with the Cluster role"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.filter(x, x.roles.exists(r, r == 'Ingress')).size() <= 10`,message="subnetsConfig must contain less than 10 subnets with the Ingress role"

> 	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=IngressControllerLBSubnetsAWS

Reviewer 6: Can you refer to a feature gate in the installer?  How can the feature gate be enabled if there is no cluster?

Author: Whoops, no you can't. The installer has the concept of feature sets, but are enforced differently. For example, the [NatGatewayOutboundType in Azure](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/364a47391562d35662e64503c5e7052d06da6aec/pkg/types/azure/validation/platform.go#L103) is only supported in tech preview. I am just learning how the installer works, so I expect I may get some feedback from them.

Fixed and updated with details on tech preview vs. GA.

    SubnetsConfig []SubnetConfig `json:"subnetsConfig,omitempty"`
}

type SubnetConfig struct {
	// ID specifies the subnet ID of an existing
	// subnet.
	//

> 	// +required

Reviewer 6: spacing

    ID AWSSubnetID `json:"id"`

	// Roles specifies the roles (aka functions) that the
	// subnet will provide in the cluster.

> 	//

Reviewer 6: spacing

---
title: aws-lb-subnet-selection
authors:
- "@gcs278"
reviewers:
- "@candita"
- "@frobware"
- "@rfredette"
- "@alebedev87"
- "@miheer"
- "@Miciah"
- "@mtulio"
approvers:

> - "@patrickdillon"

Reviewer 2: My mistake. Apparently I have been an approver for 2 years!

> - "@patrickdillon"

Author: All good! I'll keep you as the approve then.

## Summary

This enhancement extends the OpenShift Installer's install-config, enabling cluster admins to
configure subnets for AWS load balancers created for their IngressControllers at install time.
This proposal allows the install-time configuration of subnets for the `default` IngressController
as well as the default subnets for any new IngressController.

This enhancement also deprecates the existing install-config field `platform.aws.subnets`
in favor of a more flexible configuration field that handles specifying subnets for both
IngressControllers and the cluster infrastructure. These new subnet roles, referred to as
IngressController-role subnets, cluster-role subnets, or dual-role subnets (for those serving both roles)
are further defined in [Defining Subnet Roles](#defining-subnets-roles).

## Definitions and Terminology

### The `default` IngressController

This proposal will refer to the IngressController that gets created automatically during installation and handles
the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController. Note that
"default IngressController subnets" refers to the default subnets used by all IngressControllers, including

> the `default` IngressController. This is different from "`default` IngressController subnets", which specifically

Reviewer 2: I appreciate your giving this comment for clarity. I would just add that grammatically this distinction is made with hyphens. default-IngressController subnets would be the subnets for the `default` IngressController, and default IngressController subnets (without the hyphen) would be the default subnets. The hyphen denotes which word the adjective "default" modifies.

Additionally, if the user wants all future IngressControllers to use the new subnet by default, see
[Updating the Default Subnets for New IngressControllers Workflow](#updating-the-default-subnets-for-new-ingresscontrollers-workflow).

#### Dedicated IngressController Subnets for Security

_"As a cluster admin, I want to install a cluster with all IngressControllers
using a dedicated subnets in order to have load balancer VIPs on a dedicated VLAN for
applying ACLs."_

A cluster admin wants their all of their load balancers mapped to separate subnet(s), allowing
firewall ACL rules to specifically target the load balancer VLAN
(see https://access.redhat.com/support/cases/#/case/03054638). The dedicated subnet(s)
must be located in the same AZ(s) as the provided cluster-role subnets; otherwise,
the IngressController will not function properly.

See [Setting Default IngressController subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-default-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

> 

Author: Wait, I just had an realization, we are creating a new "subnets" field, can't we disregard the need for compatibility?
 
By that, I mean, maybe we can solve [OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432) while we do this `subnets` field deprecation at the same time? Since the users have to explicitly opt into the new API, can't we implement a different behavior?

If we can, I think that will massively simplify this API and proposal, like @mtulio has suggested before and make these non-goals, now goals:
```
- Assume that bring-your-own (BYO) cluster-role subnets are also IngressController-role subnets.
- Assume that IngressController-role subnets are also cluster-role subnets.
```

If we assume Cluster Role Subnets == IngressController Role subnets, then:
- The API is simplified (no need for `role` fields, it's all the same)
- No need to explain the role concept in this proposal
- Customers won't being surprised when they install a cluster in an existing VPC and their `default` ingress controller selects subnets external to there cluster (OCPBUGS-17432)
- Customers won't be suprised when they install a private cluster in an existing VPC and their `default` ingress controller selects a public subnet [RFE-2816](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-2816) 
- We'd be effectively taking full control of the default subnet selection process for IngressControllers from what AWS decided in [kubernetes/kubernetes#97431](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97431)
- It's more obvious to customers because there is no ambiguity about which subnets are being used when installing a cluster, better UX

We don't have any users stories that where users actually **want** to use subnets outside of what they specified as cluster subnets (all users stories are the opposite...stop selecting external subnets). Should we leverage this deprecation of `subnets` to make thing work as expected? Any reason why I am missing something here? @JoelSpeed @mtulio @patrickdillon

> 

Reviewer 3: Sounds like a simpler approach to me if the user stories are talking about stopping using ingress subnets outside of the cluster subnets. Do we have any use cases where the ingress subsets are a subset of the cluster subnets, or is it always that they are a matching set?

> 

Author: > Do we have any use cases where the ingress subsets are a subset of the cluster subnets, or is it always that they are a matching set?

I've been looking. I thought maybe AWS Outposts would potentially provide a use case for this, but I don't think so after some digging. For AWS Outpost, it seems Cluster-Role subnets still should == IngressController subnets (via https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1260). So please, let me know if anyone has any use cases of when IngressController subnets != Cluster-Role Subnets.

But not to say there is an edge case that might come up later. I think the important thing is that we design the API in such a way that it _could_ be extended to accommodate different subnet usages in the future.

> 

Author: Just following up on this thread for completeness. I've since spoken to Service Delivery and they advocated for a dedicated IngressController subnet user story (which I removed, but now I will add back in a future PR push), which means we need a new API and `Cluster` & `IngressController` roles regardless.

We've since decided to support subnet discovery as a no-opinion path (no IngressController-role subnets specified). See meeting [docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GOENio9rg3rj0lRn1Sz0DqguqLsNfhwr2GOjOiR6E6I/edit?tab=t.0) for more details on why.

Ingress Operator will be updated to use the `Subnets` fields in the IngressConfig as the default subnets
for new IngressControllers.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

As mentioned in [the Proposal section](#proposal), the install-config and the IngressConfig will be updated
to support propagating default subnets to all new IngressControllers, including the `default`
IngressController. The Ingress Operator will also need to be updated to use the new IngressConfig
`Subnet` fields.

#### Installer Updates

The `platform.aws.subnets` field in the install-config will be deprecated and replaced with a new
field, `platform.aws.subnetsConfig`. Much like `Subnets`, the new `SubnetsConfig` field indicates
a list of subnets in a pre-existing VPC, but also provide the role that the subnet will fulfill in the
cluster. Additionally, since it is a struct and not a `[]string`, it provide the ability to be
expanded with additional subnet-related fields in the future.

The following install-config reflect the initial TechPreview release of this feature:

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`!(has(self.subnets) && has(self.subnetsConfig))`,message="cannot use both subnets and subnetsConfig"

Reviewer 2: > Install config isn't a CRD,

FWIW we do generate an install config CRD for internal usage:
https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/data/data/install.openshift.io_installconfigs.yaml

> do you think it would be useful to have the install config have the ability to leverage markers like other Kube APIs, then internally generate a json schema and run it through CRD validation? 

Yes it strikes me that it would be useful in terms of code readability & maintenance (not sure if you had other benefits in mind), as the installer validation code is difficult to maintain, it seems like CEL might be a better way to organize. 

That said, installer validation code is already so deeply developed it is unrealistic (and not worth the squeeze) to untangle it. I'm not sure how we would approach this problem: hybrid/frankenstein validation?

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`!(has(self.subnets) && has(self.subnetsConfig))`,message="cannot use both subnets and subnetsConfig"

Reviewer 3: In theory we could implement the CRD validation style as a new approach and have new additions validated using the new approach, and existing validations remain as they are (perhaps over time slowly migrating?)

> code readability & maintenance (not sure if you had other benefits in mind), as the installer validation code is difficult to maintain,

These were the main things I was thinking, and also consistency, people are used to writing API validations, so if the install config could follow a similar pattern, then the barrier to writing features touching the install config is reduced

- The installer should reject multiple `IngressController` role subnets in the same AZ as this will be rejected
  by the AWS CCM.

#### IngressConfig API Updates

The `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.classicLoadBalancer.subnets` and `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer.subnets`
fields will be added to the IngressConfig to encode the default subnets for all IngressControllers. Regardless of the
load balancer type specified in the `platform.aws.lbType` install-config field, the installer will populate both
`networkLoadBalancer` and `classicLoadBalancer` subnet fields with the values provided in the new
`platform.aws.subnetsConfig` install-config field. The `AWSSubnets` struct is duplicated from the IngressController CRD
to maintain API consistency. Although the new `subnetsConfig` install-config field only supports specifying subnets by
ID, the IngressConfig CRD will still support specifying subnets by name for completeness.

```go
// AWSIngressSpec holds the desired state of the Ingress for Amazon Web Services infrastructure provider.
// This only includes fields that can be modified in the cluster.
// +union

> type AWSIngressSpec struct {

Author: > what effect would you expect the awsLBType field to have vs what's specified here?

In my opinion, for Ingress Config, I think LB Type should have no direct effect/relationship/impact on the `classicLoadBalancer` and `networkLoadBalancer` fields. These fields should be independent by the fact that these CRD fields are representing a global IngressController defaulting mechanism.

I would like to be able to say "I want my IngressControllers to use a NLB as default and to also use subnet-xyz as default, regardless of the LB Type". While it could be enforced as a union, it would limit our ability to set defaults for different LB Types. Union == restricting defaults to only the default LB Type selected at install time.

Is removing the `+union` and `+unionDiscriminator` in `AWSIngressSpec` a compatible thing to do? I don't quite understand what these tags do, other than being informational, as they don't currently enforce the union (hence why we have to use CEL).

> type AWSIngressSpec struct {

Reviewer 3: > Is removing the +union and +unionDiscriminator in AWSIngressSpec a compatible thing to do? I don't quite understand what these tags do, other than being informational, as they don't currently enforce the union (hence why we have to use CEL

I think this will be compatible, we need to review the doc more before we make any commitments I think

> type AWSIngressSpec struct {

Author: Agreed. It's worth a mention that @miheer's PR is adding this CEL for [networkLoadBalancerParameters](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/2043/files#diff-0beb33df12dd4ecac8d28c3fe688acc3a178de15c301325e33f586207b2c748cR134).

I think that's fine for now, since I can remove it (i.e. loosing validation) later if we decide that subnets should be defaulted for all LB types of IngressControllers.

    [...]
    // classicLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // classic load balancer.
    //
    // +optional
    ClassicLoadBalancerParameters *AWSClassicLoadBalancerParameters `json:"classicLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

    // networkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // network load balancer.
    //
    // +optional
    NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`
}

// AWSClassicLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Classic load balancer.
type AWSClassicLoadBalancerParameters struct {

>     // Subnets specifies the default subnets for all IngressControllers,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // subnets specifies the default subnets for all IngressControllers,
```

    // including the default IngressController. This default will be overridden
    // if subnets are specified on the IngressController.
    // If omitted, IngressController subnets will be automatically discovered
    // based on the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag, whether it's public
    // or private, and the availability zone.
    //
    // +optional

>     // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=IngressConfigLBSubnetsAWS

Reviewer 3: If classicLoadBalancer doesn't already exist, then this should be moved up 1 level

Reviewer 3: I was talking specifically about the feature gate level. The feature gating should be only at the top most new field, it's not needed at lower levels, and, with your current design, you'd introduce the `classicLoadBalancer` as a stable field with nothing in it, as the fields inside are all tech preview, the `classicLoadBalancer` should be gated, not the fields within

Author: Whoops sorry, I thought the comment was the on the `classicLoadBalancer` field, not the feature gate.

Ack. That makes sense. Moving up one level. However, I do think we need to consider @miheer's simultaneous effort in which he is adding to `networkLoadBalancer` [here](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/2043/files#diff-0beb33df12dd4ecac8d28c3fe688acc3a178de15c301325e33f586207b2c748cR165) (I think it should also have a feature gate). I suppose with https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes-sigs-controller-tools/pull/21 we can do `AND` in the feature gate markers if the scenario is that we both go TP at the same time, so I think it's an non-issue.

Reviewer 3: Yep you're right, Miheer's gate is also at the wrong level and should be gated higher

    Subnets []AWSSubnets `json:"subnets,omitempty"`
}

// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer.
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {

>     // Subnets specifies the default subnets for all IngressControllers,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // subnets specifies the default subnets for all IngressControllers,
```

    // including the default IngressController. This default will be overridden
    // if subnets are specified on the IngressController.
    // If omitted, IngressController subnets will be automatically discovered
    // based on the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag, whether it's public
    // or private, and the availability zone.
    //
    // +optional
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=IngressConfigLBSubnetsAWS

>     Subnets []AWSSubnets `json:"subnets,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Can we add a sensible maximum length to this list?

   not both. Note that each `IngressController` role subnet MUST have a corresponding `Cluster` role subnet in the
   same AZ; otherwise, the load balancer will be unable to route traffic into the cluster: 
    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    baseDomain: devcluster.openshift.com
    metadata:
      name: my-cluster
    [...]
    platform:
      aws:
        region: us-east-2
        subnetsConfig:
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d4 # AZ us-east-1
          roles:
          - Cluster
        - id: subnet-0fcf8e0392f0910d5 # AZ us-east-1
          roles:
          - Ingress
        lbType: NLB
    [...]
    ```
2. The OpenShift Installer installs the cluster into the VPC where the subnets exist, and populates the
   IngressConfig's `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer.subnets` and
   `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer.subnets` field.
3. When the Ingress Operator starts, it uses the IngressConfig's `Subnets` value for the `default` IngressController
   as well as the default for all new IngressControllers.
4. Since the IngressController subnet(s) are in the same AZ as the cluster-role subnets(s), ingress traffic is successfully

>    routed from the load balancer to the nodes.

Reviewer: What will be the [health check state][state] of the targets attached to the Load Balancers in this use case where the subnets of nodes are different than the subnets of LB in the same AZ? Will CLB and NLB have the same routing behavior?

[state]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/target-group-health-checks.html#target-health-states

subnets without the `kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id>` tag (introduced by [kubernetes/kubernetes#97431](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97431)),
might find their future installs broken.

### Assume All Subnets are Cluster-Role Subnets Alternative

To simplify the install-config API and mitigate [No IngressController-Role Subnet in the Same AZ as Cluster-Role Subnets Risk](#no-ingresscontroller-role-subnet-in-the-same-az-as-cluster-role-subnets-risk),
we could make the assumption that any provided subnets are cluster-role subnets. This would invalidate the user story
[Dedicated IngressController Subnets for Security](#dedicated-ingresscontroller-subnets-for-security), but simplify the function of
providing subnets via the install-config API.

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.
type Platform struct {
    [...]
    // SubnetsConfig specifies the subnets configuration for
    // a cluster by specifying a list of subnets with their
    // desired role. Leave unset to have the installer
    // create subnets in a new VPC on your behalf.
    //
    // +optional

>     SubnetsConfig []SubnetConfig `json:"subnetsConfig,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Did you bikeshed much on the name `SubnetsConfig`? We can't use `Subnets` as that is the field being deprecated... but I do think `Subnets` is better. It occurs to me that we could use `Subnets` with one level of misdirection by creating a VPC struct, so we could include the new fields as `installConfig.Platform.aws.vpc.subnets`. Thought I would throw that idea out there...

    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x == y))`,message="roles cannot contain duplicates"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`!self.exists(r, r.type == 'EdgeNode') || self.size() == 1`,message="EdgeNode roles cannot be combined with any other roles"

>     // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`!(self.exists(r1, r1.type == 'ControlPlaneExternalLB') && self.exists(r2, r2.type == 'ControlPlaneInternalLB'))`,message="roles cannot contain both ControlPlaneExternalLB and ControlPlaneInternalLB"

Reviewer 3: An alternative to this validation, in case you find this one easier to reason about
```
self.filter(r, r.type == 'ControlPlaneExternalLB' || r.type == 'ControlPlaneInternalLB').size() < 2
```

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^subnet-[0-9A-Za-z]+$`
type AWSSubnetID string

// SubnetRole specifies the role (aka functions) that the subnet will provide in the cluster.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.role != 'ControlPlaneLB' || has(self.controlPlaneLB)`,message="controlPlaneLB is required when role is ControlPlaneLB"

Reviewer 3: I don't think this quite works. It allows `controlPlaneLB` to be present when the role is not `ControlPlaneLB`, we normally use a ternary for this
```
self.role == 'ControlPlaneLB' ? has(self.controlPlaneLB) : !has(self.controlPlaneLB)
```

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.role != 'ControlPlaneLB' || has(self.ingressControllerLB)`,message="controlPlaneLB is required when role is IngressControllerLB"

Reviewer 3: The controlPlaneLB you mention, is not actually inside this struct yet, is that intentional?

type SubnetRole struct {
    // type specifies the type of role (aka function)

>     // that the subnet will provide in the cluster.

Reviewer 3: It would be good to include the list of available roles within this godoc (I assume we generate docs from the types here as well?)

Author: Right, done.
